Update main portal network introduction document (#84)
ethereum/portal-network-specs: README.md

## Introduction

> The Portal Network is an in progess effort to enable lightweight protocol access to resource constrained devices.  The term *"portal"* is used to indicate that these networks provide a *view* into the protocol but are not critical to the operation of the core Ethereum protocol.

Reviewer: *nit*: "enable access to devices" sounds like we're enabling people to access lightweight devices. -> "to enable lightweight protocol access by resource constrained devices".

> The Portal Network is comprised of multiple peer-to-peer networks which together provide the data and functionality necessary to expose the standard JSON-RPC API.  These networks are specially designed to ensure that clients participating in these networks can do so with minimal expendature of networking bandwidth, CPU, RAM, and HDD resources.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what the intended audience for this document is but a link to the api might be useful to them: https://eth.wiki/json-rpc/API

Reviewer: s/expendature/expenditure/

> The term "Portal Client" is used to describe a piece of software that participates in these networks and typically exposes the standard JSON-RPC API

Reviewer: maybe: "The term 'Portal Client' describes a piece of software which participates in these networks. Portal Clients typically expose the standard JSON-RPC API."

## Motivation

> The Portal Network is focused on delivering reliable, lightweight, and decentralized access to the Ethereum protocol.

Reviewer: :fire: nice short description!

### Prior Work on the "Light Ethereum Subprotocol" (LES)

> The term "light client" has historically refered to a client of the existing DevP2P based LES network.  This network is designed using a client/server architecture.  The LES network has a total capacity dictated by the number of "servers" on the network.  In order for this network to scale, the "server" capacity has to increase.  This also means that at any point in time the network has some total capacity which if exceeded will cause service degredation across the network.  Because of this the LES network is unreliable when operating near capacity.

Reviewer: s/degredation/degradation/

## Architecture

> The Portal Network is built upon on the [Discover V5 protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/discv5/discv5.md) and operates over the UDP transport.

Reviewer: This doc calls it the "Node Discovery Protocol v5", though "discv5" is probably also a fine name given that previous paragraphs did not give devp2p and LES full names. Calling it "Discover v5 protocol" might cause some momentary confusion

The Discovery v5 protocol allows building custom sub-protocols via the use of the built in TALKREQ and TALKRESP message.

The Portal Network is divided into the following sub-protocols.

- State Network
- History Network
- Transaction Gossip Network
- Header Gossip Network
- Canonical Indices Network

Each of these networks is designed to deliver a specific unit of functionality.  Most portal clients will participate in all of these networks in order to deliver the full JSON-RPC API.  Each network however is designed to be independent of the others, allowing clients the option of only participating in a subset of them if they wish.

> All of the sub-protocols in the Portal Network establish their own Kademlia DHT network that is managed independent of the base Discovery V5 protocol Kademlia DHT.

Reviewer: While these networks are certainly heavily inspired by Kademlia they're different enough that I don't think they should be called Kademlia.

maybe: "Each of these sub-protocols establish their own DHTs which are managed independently of the discv5 DHT."

## Design Principles

Each of the Portal Network sub-protocols follows these design principles.

1. Isolation

>   - Each network should be able to be run independent of the other networks.  Participation in one network should not require participation in another network.

Reviewer: s/independent/independently/, though I think the entire "Each network should be able to be run independent of the other networks." sentence can be dropped without any loss of meaning.

2. Distribution of Responsibility
  - Normal operation of the network should result in a roughly even spread of responsibility across the individual nodes in the network.
3. Tunable Resource Requirements

>   - Individual nodes should be able to control the amount of machine resources (HDD/CPU/RAM) they must expend to be part of the network.

Reviewer: maybe: "Individual nodes should be able to control the amount of machine resources (HDD/CPU/RAM) they provide to the network"

Also, (2) and (3) seem to conflict with each other. I think (2) means to say nodes which have donated the same amount of disk space to the network are given roughly equal load (although I don't think that's true, whoever is close to uniswap will receive a lot of requests). Or, maybe (2) mean demands are made from nodes in proportion to how much they have offered. I'm not sure of a succinct way to express that.

Author: I like the cleanup on phrasing for (3).  I agree that (2) misses the mark a little but I'm also unsure how to cleanup the phrasing.  Gonna just leave it and hope to clean it up in a future pass if it remains confusing.

These design principles are aimed at ensuring that participation in the Portal Network is feasible even on resource constrained devices.

## The JSON-RPC API

The following JSON-RPC API endpoints are intended to be supported by the portal network and exposed by portal clients.

TODO

## Bridge Nodes

> We use the term "bridge" node to refer to the process by which data enters the Portal Network.  A "bridge" node is a normal node in the Portal Network that is able to bring in new and missing data from some external source and inject it into the Portal Network.  These nodes would not be special in any way from the perspective of the Portal Network.

Reviewer: maybe: The term "bridge node" refers to portal clients which, in addition to participating in the sub-protocols, also inject data into the Portal Network.  Any node with valid data is allowed to inject it; from the perspective of the protocols underlying the Portal Network there is nothing special about bridge nodes.

The planned architecture for bridge nodes is to pull data from the standard JSON-RPC API of a Full Node and "push" this data into their respective networks within the Portal Network.

## Network Functionality

### State Network: Accounts and Contract Storage

> The State Network facilitates on-demand retrieval of the Ethereum "state" data.  This includes things like:

Reviewer: s/this includes things like/this includes/

I think what follows is the full list!

- Reading account balances or nonce values
- Retrieving contract code
- Reading contract storage values

> The responsibility for storing the underlying "state" data should be evenly distributed across the nodes in the network.  Nodes must be able to choose how much state they want to store.  The data is distributed in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to query for any individual piece of state data.  When retrieving state data, a node should be able to validate the response using a recent header from the header chain.

Reviewer: I'm still not sure how to phrase it but "nodes can choose how much to store" and "the responsibility to storing state is split evenly" can only be unified by finding the node which has chosen the smallest amount of data and giving that amount of data to every node.

I don't think anything is lost by dropping "The responsibility for storing the underlying "state" data should be evenly distributed across the nodes in the network.", but I could be misunderstanding!

Also, for "When retrieving state data, a node should be able to validate the response using a recent header from the header chain.", the responding node won't provide any proofs?

Author: Maybe the problem here is distinction between individual nodes and the network as a whole.

- we want the data distributed evenly round the network...
- we accept that the data is not evenly distributed across individual nodes...
- we aim for an emergent property which is that nodes that offer the same storage will have roughly the same amount of the state data.

Still going to leave this for a later editorial pass.

Author: > Also, for "When retrieving state data, a node should be able to validate the response using a recent header from the header chain.", the responding node won't provide any proofs?

Yeah, wording isn't totally crystal clear here.  Yes, some responses come back with a proof, and they would validate that proof by checking that it is anchored to a recent state root from the header chain...

> The responsibility for storing the underlying "state" data should be evenly distributed across the nodes in the nebtwork.  Nodes must be able to choose how much state they want to store.  The data is distributed in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to query for any individual piece of state data.  When retrieving state data, a node should be able to validate the response using a recent header from the header chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The responsibility for storing the underlying "state" data should be evenly distributed across the nodes in the network.  Nodes must be able to choose how much state they want to store.  The data is distributed in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to query for any individual piece of state data.  When retrieving state data, a node should be able to validate the response using a recent header from the header chain.
```

> The network will be dependent on receiving new and updated state for new blocks. Full "bridge" nodes acting as benevolent state providers would be responsible for bringing in this data from the main network. The network should be able to remain healthy even with a small number of bridge nodes.  As new data enters the network, nodes must be able to validate the data using a recent header from the header chain.

Reviewer: In the intro paragraph future tense was converted to present tense. Do you want to make the same change here? "would be responsible" -> "are responsible"

Reviewer: "As new data enters the network, nodes must be able to validate the data using a recent header from the header chain." what does this "must" mean? I'm used to specs using ["must"](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) to mean something required in order for an implementation of the spec to count as a correct implementation.

Does this mean that in order to participate in the state network nodes must have access to the header chain, either by being a full node or by participating in the history network?

Author: updated from "must be able" to "are able" because yes, a node could just choose to not verify the data and the network would not care.

Querying and reading data from the network should be fast enough for human-driven wallet operations, like estimating the gas for a transaction or reading state from a contract.

### History Network: Headers, Blocks, and Receipts

The History Network facilitates on-demand retrieval of the history of the Ethereum chain.  This includes:

- Headers
- Block bodies
- Receipts

> The responsibility for storing this data should be evently distributed across the nodes in the network.  Nodes must be able to choose how much history data they want to store.  The data is distributed in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to queryy for any individual piece of history data.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The responsibility for storing this data should be evenly distributed across the nodes in the network.  Nodes must be able to choose how much history data they want to store.  The data is distributed in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to query for any individual piece of history data.  
```

> Participants to this network are assumed to have access to the canonical header chain.

Reviewer: s/to/in

This reads as if nodes must have independent access to the header chain (by connecting to a full node?) in order to participate in the history network.

Author: The plan is for them to use the "Header Gossip Network" but I'm trying not to anchor them to each other because they could just use Infura or a Full Node if they really want....

> All data retrieved from the history network is addressed by block hash.  Headers retrieved from this network can be validated to match the requested block hash.  Block Bodies and Receipts retrieved from this network can be validated against the corresponding header fields.

Reviewer: maybe: 

All data retrieved from the history network can be immediately verified by the requesting node. The requesting node always knows the expected hash of the requested data and can reject responses with an incorrect hash.

### Canonical Indices Network: Transactions by Hash and Blocks by Number

> The Canonical Indices Network facilitates access to canonical information about transactions and blocks.  This includes:

Reviewer: Maybe:

The Canonical Indices Network is a pair of indices enabling faster access to transactions and blocks. It includes:
- An index which maps each transaction hash to the block within which the transaction was included
- An index which maps each block number to the hash of the canonical block with that number

Reviewer: I think phrasing it this way allows "We refer to the data that backs these two lookups as "Canonical Indices" as they serve as a type of database index for fast retrieval of this information which would otherwise require prohibitively expensive scanning of all historical blocks." to be dropped.

- Determining the canonical block within which a transaction was included
- Determining the block hash of the canonical block at a given block number.

We refer to the data that backs these two lookups as "Canonical Indices" as they serve as a type of database index for fast retrieval of this information which would otherwise require prohibitively expensive scanning of all historical blocks.

The responsibility for storing the records that make up these two indices should be evently distributed across the nodes in the network.  Nodes must be able to choose how many records from these indices they wish to store.  The records must be distributed across the network in a manner that allows nodes to determine the appropriate nodes to query for an individual record.

> Transaction information returned from this network will need to include a merkle proof against the `Header.transactions_trie` for validation purposes.

Reviewer: "will need to include" -> "includes"

> Block number information returned from this network will need to include a merkle proof against the header accumulator.

Reviewer: "will need to include" -> "includes"

### Transaction Gossip Network: Sending Transactions

The Transaction Gossip Network facilitates broadcasting new transactions for inclusion in a future block.

Nodes in this network must be able to limit how much of the transaction pool they wish to process and gossip.

The goal of the transaction gossip network is to make sure nodes can broadcast transaction such that they are made available to miners for inclusion in a future block.

> Transactions which are part of this network's gossip must be able to be validated without access to the Ethereum state. This is accomplished by bundling a proof which includes the account balance and nonce for the transaction sender.

Reviewer: This section might deserve a note mentioning this is required in order to prevent DOS attacks.
